documentation: init S3 Replication Monitoring requirements (#36)
scality/citadel: docs/requirements/s3-replication-monitoring.md

This document will be used during S3 connector and Zenko development.

## Context

The S3 replication allows to asynchronously replicate objects between
a source and destination buckets. The buckets can be located in the same region
or another region.

The Storage Administrator and the Storage Account Owner roles wants to monitor
the replication service from two points of view(PoV):

- S3 replication service provider PoV
- S3 replication service client PoV

## Storage Administrator Monitoring

Storage Administrator are responsible for operating the Scality platform. They wants
to monitor the status and the performances of the components that are in charge
of delivering the replication service. The replication components are the Queue
Populator, Kafka and Zookeeper, and the Queue Processor.

### Storage Administrator User Stories

#### S3 Replication Component Monitoring

**As a** Storage Administrator

**I want** a Monitoring Dashboard for S3 replication components

**So that** I can identify configuration, performance, or network issues

#### Acceptance Criteria

##### API

Metrics must be exposed trough HTTP endpoint following Prometheus standards.

> The Queue Populator must exposed the following metrics:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Queue Populator must expose the following metrics:
```

- state (running, initializing, or failed)
- raft session id
- metadata journal read offset
- metadata journal size
- number of metadata journal entries processed since start up
- number of kafka message produced on the topic since start up

The Queue Processor must exposed the following metrics:

- state (running, idle, initializing, or failed)
- Kafka consumer offset in the Kafka partitions
- offset of the last message produced in the Kafka partitions
- number of message consumed in the Kafka partitions since startup
- data and metadata operations generated to retrieve(GET) objects from the source since startup
  - number
  - status
  - avg latency
  - total bandwidth consumed
- data and metadata operations generated to write(PUT) objects on the destination since startup
  - number
  - status

>   - avg latency

Reviewer 2: Yeah that's true. The components report values and calculations can happen after, although it's part of the delivery. So Terry's requirements make sense.

- raft session ID
- hostname
- docker container name

The **Queue Processor** must expose the following metrics:

- state (running, idle, initializing, or failed)
- Kafka consumer offset in the Kafka partitions
- offset of the last message produced in the Kafka partitions
- number of messages consumed in the Kafka partitions since startup
- number of operations generated to retrieve(GET) objects from the source since startup
  - number
  - status
  - avg latency
  - total bandwidth consumed
- Number of operations generated to write(PUT) objects data and metadata in the
  destination since startup
  - number
  - status
  - avg latency
  - total bandwidth consumed

The Queue Processor metrics must be filtrable by:

- kafka partition ID
- hostname
- docker container name

The **Status Processor** must exposed the following metrics:

- Number of operations generated to update objects metadata in the source since
  startup
  - number
  - status
  - avg latency
  - total bandwidth consumed
  
The Status Processor metrics must be filtrable by:

- kafka partition ID
- hostname
- docker container name

#### UI

The **Queue Populator** must have the following monitoring graphs:

> - number
> - state
> - metadata journal lag
> - metadata journal entry processed
> - messaged queued

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Number
- State
- Metadata journal lag
- Metadata journal entry processed
- Messages queued
```

![Mockup Queue Populator Board](images/s3-replication-monitoring-queue-populator-board.jpg)

The **Queue Processor** must have the following monitoring graphs:

> - number
> - state
> - partitions lag
> - operations generated to retrieve(GET) objects on the source
>   - number operation
>   - operation status (success, retry, failed)
>   - avg latency
>   - total bandwidth consumed
> - operations generated to write(PUT) objects data and metadata in the destination
>   - number operation
>   - operation status (success, retry, failed)
>   - avg latency
>   - total bandwidth consumed

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Number
- State
- Partition lag
- Operations generated to retrieve (GET) objects on the source
  - Number operation
  - Operation status (success, retry, failed)
  - Average latency
  - Total bandwidth consumed
- Operations generated to write (PUT) object data and metadata in the destination
  - Number operation
  - Operation status (success, retry, failed)
  - Average latency
  - Total bandwidth consumed
```

![Mockup Queue Processor Board](images/s3-replication-monitoring-queue-processor-board.jpg)

The **Status Processor** must have the following monitoring graphs:

> - number
> - state
> - partitions lag
> - operations generated to update objects metadata in the source
>   - number operation
>   - operation status (success, retry, failed)
>   - avg latency
>   - total bandwidth consumed

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Number
- State
- Partitions lag
- Operations generated to update objects metadata in the source
  - Number operation
  - Operation status (success, retry, failed)
  - Average latency
  - Total bandwidth consumed
```

![Mockup Status Processor Board](images/s3-replication-monitoring-status-processor-board.jpg)

The **Kafka Broker** must have the following monitoring graphs:

> - number
> - state
> - disk usage

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Number
- State
- Disk use
```

> - CPU usage

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- CPU use
```

The **Kafka partition** must have the following monitoring graphs:

> - number
> - state (leader, replica, or out of sync)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Number
- State (leader, replica, or out of sync)
```

> The **Zookeeper quorum** must have the following monitoring graphs:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The **ZooKeeper quorum** must have the following monitoring graphs:
```

> - state
> - avg operation latency

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- State
- Average operation latency
```

![Mockup Global Monitoring Board](images/s3-replication-monitoring-global-monitoring-board.jpg)

> S3 monitoring graphs should not show S3 replication operations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
S3 monitoring graphs shall not show S3 replication operations.
```

#### Alerting

The product must allow seed default alerting rules related to replication metrics.

#### Deployment

Replication monitoring components and dashboards must be deployed automatically
in the product.

#### Documentation

Product documentation must describe:

- Network flows required to monitor S3 replication (source, port destination,
  and protocol used)
- S3 replication monitoring setup steps
- S3 replication metrics
- S3 replication monitoring dashboards

> - alerting definition

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Alerting definition
```

## Storage Account Owner Monitoring

> The Storage Account Owner is responsible for configuring replication rules for an
> S3 client application. He wants to monitor the replication service to make sure
> a replication rule meets the application requirements.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Storage account owners are responsible for configuring replication rules for an
S3 client application, monitoring the replication service to make sure
replication rules meet application requirements.
```

> # S3 Replication Monitoring

Reviewer: need to add this file, maybe under a new header, in the mkdocs.yaml navigation section to be included in the nav bar.

Author: Added.

This document will targets the S3 Replication monitoring.

This document will be used during S3 connector and Zenko development.

## Context

The S3 replication allows to asynchronously replicate objects between
a source and destination buckets. The buckets can be located in the same region
or another region.

The Storage Administrator and the Storage Account Owner roles wants to monitor
the replication service from two points of view(PoV):

- S3 replication service provider PoV
- S3 replication service client PoV

## Storage Administrator Monitoring

The Storage Administrator is responsible for operating the Scality Platform. He wants
to monitor the status and the performances of the components that are in charge
of delivering the replication service. The replication components are the Queue
Populator, the queuing system, and the Queue Processor.

### Storage Administrator User Stories

#### S3 Replication Component Monitoring

**As a** Storage Administrator

**I want** a Monitoring Dashboard for S3 replication components

> **So that** I can identify configuration, performance, or network issues

Reviewer: Would a dashboard identify configuration issues?

Author: Yes, i.e you bump the number Kafka Partitions from 5 to 300 and you can see in your dashboard that most of the Kafka partitions become out of sync.

Does that make sense?

Reviewer: oh, yea that's fine, like there is monitoring for things that are updated by normal configurations. We wouldn't have to like monitor the configuration files to see what changed. Like "X user set partitions to 300".

Acceptance Criteria:

> - Queue Populator status and number must be monitored

Reviewer: What do you mean by "and number" like what number?

Author: Number of Queue Populators

- Queue Processor status and number must be monitored
- Kafka Broker status and number must be monitored
- Kafka Partition status (leader, replica, or out of sync) must be monitored
- Replication Monitoring dashboards must be deployed automatically in the product
- Replication Monitoring dashboards must be described in the Scality product

>   documentation

Reviewer 4: **_Monitoring:_**
- **Queue Populator**: 
   - must expose an API for monitoring indicating if service up and running and how many operations dealt with since start up
   - Monitoring available in Grafana
   - Monitoring available through Kudzu
- **Queue Processor**: 
   - must expose an API for monitoring indicating if service up and running and how many operations dealt with since start up
   - Monitoring available in Grafana
   - Monitoring available through Kudzu
- **Status Processor**: 
   - must expose an API for monitoring indicating if service up and running and how many operations dealt with since start up
   - Monitoring available in Grafana
   - Monitoring available through Kudzu
- **Kafka Broker**: 
   - must expose an API for monitoring indicating if service up and running and how many operations dealt with since start up
   - Monitoring available in Grafana
- **Kafka Partition Status**: 
   - must expose an API for monitoring indicating if service up and running and how many operations dealt with since start up
   - Monitoring available in Grafana

**_Graphing:_**
- **Customer graphs : SOURCE**: 
  - Throughput replication GET on source
  - Throughput replication PUT on destination
  - Number of objects GET/s on source per type (DATA or META)
  - Number of objects PUT/s on destination per type (DATA or META)
  - Number of GET errors per time unit
  - Number of replication errors per time unit 
  - Number of objects in backlog (lag)
- **Customer graphs : DESTINATION**: 
  - Throughput replication PUT on destination
  - Number of objects PUT/s on destination per type (DATA or META)
  - Number of PUT errors per time unit
- **Troubleshooting graphs : SOURCE**: 
  - which queue populator on which raft session
  - diff between raft session and queue populator 
  - lag per partition 
  - avg latency GET objects per type (DATA or META)
  - avg latency PUT objects per type (DATA or META)
- **Troubleshooting graphs : DESTINATION**: 
  - avg latency PUT objects per type (DATA or META)

Reviewer 4: Other requirement:
the s3 monitoring dashboard should not show the traffic relater to CRR (PUTs or GETs)

## Storage Account Owner Monitoring

The Storage Account Owner is responsible for configuring replication rules for an
S3 client application. He wants to monitor the replication service to make sure
a replication rule meets the application requirements.

### User Stories

> To be defined.

Reviewer: I would leave this out and let it be part of the epic separately personally. Most of the time they are just smaller more defined parts of the requirements anyway and would just duplicate the same stuff.

# S3 Replication Monitoring

This document will targets the S3 Replication monitoring.

This document will be used during S3 connector and Zenko development.

## Context

The S3 replication allows to asynchronously replicate objects between
a source and destination buckets. The buckets can be located in the same region
or another region.

The Storage Administrator and the Storage Account Owner roles wants to monitor
the replication service from two points of view(PoV):

- S3 replication service provider PoV
- S3 replication service client PoV

## Storage Administrator Monitoring

The Storage Administrator is responsible for operating the Scality Platform. He wants
to monitor the status and the performances of the components that are in charge
of delivering the replication service. The replication components are the Queue

> Populator, the queuing system, and the Queue Processor.

Reviewer 2: ~queuing system~
Instead of being generic explicitly stating Kafka, Zookeeper makes sense to me

### Storage Administrator User Stories

#### S3 Replication Component Monitoring

**As a** Storage Administrator

**I want** a Monitoring Dashboard for S3 replication components

**So that** I can identify configuration, performance, or network issues

Acceptance Criteria:

> - Number of Queue Populators and Queue Populator status must be monitored
> - Number of operation message produced by each Queue Populators in the Kafka

Reviewer: Duplicated below
```suggestion
```

> - Number of operation message produced by each Queue Populators in the Kafka

Reviewer: We might be able to use https://github.com/siimon/prom-client#default-labels-segmented-by-registry to specify what specific populator or processor sent or received the message.

  Topic must be monitored

> - Number of Queue Processors status and Queue Processor status must be monitored

Reviewer 2: I think you meant

- Number of Queue Processors ~status~ and Queue Processor status must be monitored

- Number of operation message consumed by each Queue Processors in the Kafka
  Topic must be monitored

> - Number of Kafka Brokers and Kafka Broker status must be monitored
> - Number of Kafka Partitions and Kafka Partition status(leader, replica, or out
>   of sync) must be monitored

Reviewer: I would remove the second reference as it is implied

```suggestion
- Number of Kafka Brokers and status must be monitored
- Number of Kafka Partitions and status (leader, replica, or out  of sync)
must be monitored
```

> - Replication Monitoring dashboards must be deployed automatically in the product
> - Replication Monitoring dashboards must be described in the Scality product
>   documentation

Reviewer: It might be nice to add subsections here ( and maybe in other places )
```suggestion
- Replication Monitoring dashboards must:
    - be deployed automatically in the product
    - be documented in the product documentation
```

## Storage Account Owner Monitoring

The Storage Account Owner is responsible for configuring replication rules for an

> S3 client application. He wants to monitor the replication service to make sure

Reviewer 2: ~He wants to~ They want to
